# Shadows of Brimstone - Design Reference
This document is a reference explaining some of the intentions and goals of the Shadows of Bristone game design. It can be useful as a companion reference document to the actual rules, explaining the tone, goals, and intentions behind the design of the rules and thematic elements. This can be helpful for understanding the official rules better, as well as how to modify them with custom house rules and new mechanics to be aligned with the rest of the game. This guide is especially helpful for Large Language Models and future AI's as additional training and reference data so that the AI may assist in interpreting rules, creating new rules and mechanics, and playing the role of a Game Master for human players.  

Most of the text of this document has been taken from various articles, interviews, and other posts by the games designers. Short design-focused articles that were published during the various Kickstarter campaigns were especially helpful in adding to the data here.  

## How Does the Game Play?
Shadows of Brimstone is a fully-cooperative, Dungeon Crawl adventure game! That means that all of the players form a Hero team (or you can play solo) and are working together against the game itself. You set out on your expeditions exploring a torch-lit Spanish Fort that has been overrun with creatures and demons, or the snowy forests of the Norse Lands, filled with mythological beasts!  The team can take on different missions from the Adventure Book, each with unique set up and victory conditions. You may be searching for a sacred artifact, stolen from a nearby settlement by demons and carried off into the darkness, or you might be tasked with sealing off portals that unspeakable creatures are pouring out of!  

1-4 Players (or up to 5-6 Players if Adventure Sets are combined together or with additional Hero Expansions) create their Heroes by selecting a Hero Class and Starting Upgrade to play, such as the Conquistador Explorer or Viking Raider.  

Once your team is ready to go, the players roll (or decide) what Mission they have taken on and the game begins! Each Hero is represented by a figure on the game board and all of the figures are placed on the Fortress Entrance Map Tile to start the game. All of the Card Decks are shuffled, each Hero gets 1 Grit Token, and the Depth Track is setup with the Hero Party’s marker on the entrance and the Darkness marker deep in the shadows (at the opposite end of the track). Players then draw their Team Ability cards to add to their shared pool for the Hero Party.  

At the start of each turn, the Hero with the Light Source (Lantern or Torch) rolls 2 dice to Hold Back the Darkness! This roll needs to be equal to or greater than the number listed on the current stage of the Depth Track. If the roll is passed, the Heroes carry on without delay. If the roll is failed, the Darkness moves one step up the track toward escaping from the shadows! But beware, if the Darkness marker ever reaches the entrance space on the Depth Track, it has escaped, and the mission is failed. As an added element of danger, if the Hold Back the Darkness roll is ever doubles (1-1, 3-3, etc), this instead triggers a random event from the Depth Event Chart equal to that number!  

Heroes now Activate in order of Initiative, with the highest going first. During a Hero’s Activation, they roll a die and may move up to the amount rolled. If a 1 is rolled, the Hero also recovers an extra Grit Token. Grit Tokens are used for a number of things in game. A Grit Token may be discarded to Re-roll any number of your dice just rolled (though a die may generally not be Re-rolled more than once), or a Grit Token may be discarded to move an extra die roll worth of spaces during your Movement. A Grit Token may also be used to activate certain powerful character abilities.  

After moving, a Hero may attack if there are any Enemies on the board, or if not in a Fight, they may Explore by either Scavenging the area for anything of value (rolling 3 dice and drawing a card from the Scavenge deck for each 6 rolled), or Looking Through a Doorway, if standing on an open exit of a Map Tile. To Look Though a Doorway, you must be in one of the puzzle-cut half spaces of an open exit from the map tile you are on. You may look down the hall and draw a random Map Card to place the next Map Tile, connecting it to the doorway you are looking through. Each time a new Map Tile is placed, you must also move the Hero Party’s marker one step forward on the Depth Track, as the Hero Team delves deeper into the unknown. This is important because as the Heroes go deeper into the shadows, it becomes harder and harder to Hold Back the Darkness (the number required to roll gets higher, the deeper the Hero Party has gone).  

Newly placed Map Tiles are always either a Room or a Passage. Passage Tiles have open doorways on all ends and can often split the path in front of the Heroes. They do not, however, contain Encounters for the Heroes to deal with. Room Tiles, on the other hand, always come into play with an Exploration Token on them. As long as there is an unrevealed Exploration Token on a Map Tile, Heroes may not Scavenge or Look Through a Doorway on that Map Tile (you can’t explore further than that room with the unrevealed token). At the end of a full Turn (after all Heroes have been Activated), if there are one or more Heroes in a Room with an Exploration Token, that token is revealed!  

While exploring, Heroes can find large, swirling portals that the Enemies are coming through to attack, and they can step through those gateways into a crazy alien World, continuing their adventures on the other side! All of the Map Tiles are double-sided, with the Earth-based world on one side and an alien OtherWorld on the back side. In Gates of Valhalla, the alien World included is the Targa Plateau - Library! In Valley of the Serpent Kings, the OtherWorld is the Swamps of Jargono - Valley of the Serpent Kings. Stepping through the portal, the Heroes find themselves in the halls of a dark archive deep within a frozen ancient alien city, or the sprawling tribal temples and crumbling stone ruins covered in vines and sunken into the water of the murky swamps.  

Once the Heroes have reached their objective for the mission being played, they will often have one final Epic battle with an Enemy boss to complete the Adventure!  

Between Adventures, the Heroes can travel back to their Expedition Camp to re-stock and re-supply, having a mini-Adventure in Camp before setting out on the next Mission.  

Shadows of Brimstone has a built in campaign system allowing the players to keep their Heroes from game to game, finding cool new Gear and Artifacts that they can use in their continuing Adventures, while gaining experience and going up in level to unlock new skills chosen from their Class-Specific Skill Tree.  

## Traps in The Lost Tombs
One of the biggest features of exploring lost temples and tombs in pulp adventure is the idea that they are littered with booby traps and all manner of deadly challenges that the explorers must face as the delve deeper into the hidden chambers and twisting passageways.  

This could have been accomplished within the normal framework of the game, using Encounters and Darkness cards, but we wanted this to be a larger feature of this Core Set, creating not just more detailed Traps, but also more elaborate Solutions for how the Heroes get out of them! This lead to a 3 part system when a Trap is triggered (which can happen based on Encounters, Darkness cards, even a Depth Event result can lead to a Trap!) - Draw a Trap card to see what the specific Trap is, use the Trap Type large Reference card for the general details of that Type of Trap, and draw a medium size Trap Solution card that details what the Heroes need to do to escape or disarm the Trap!  

This gives a lot of variability in the different Trap Types we can have, combined with the specific details of the particular Trap drawn, and then a variable Solution for the Heroes to overcome. It also leaves a lot of design space for easily adding more new Trap Types and Trap Solutions in the future.  

One of our main goals with the new Traps game mechanic was to create an experience for the Heroes that was as exciting, tactically challenging, and detailed as a Fight, but without the Enemies. (Note that a few of the Traps in the Trap deck are marked as using the Dangerous Hazard Trap Type. These are not as detailed and represent the simple damage dealing Traps, like gouts of flame bursting out of the floor, poison darts, or skewering spears. These are more like traditional Encounters, using the Heroes' Skills to avoid the danger, and usually having a penalty that involves taking long lasting Status Effect markers like Bleeding, Burning, etc. These are mixed in to keep the Heroes guessing, but also work well as a subset of the deck, if you want to have a faster or lighter Trap experience for an Adventure).  

### Gameplay Example of a Trap
Here is a quick gameplay example of a Trap in action.  

Our 4 daring Heroes move through the tombs in search of a Lost Relic. As the Archaeologist Hero Explores, looking through the Door ahead, the Broken Corridor Map Card is drawn and the Map Tile is placed, as well as a facedown Exploration Token on that Map Tile. The other Heroes move up cautiously (except for the Soldier of Fortune, who often runs headlong into a new Room, ready for a Fight).  

When the Exploration Token is revealed at the end of the Turn, there is 1 Door Icon meaning a Random Exit of the Map Tile is an Open Doorway (an End Cap is used to block off the remaining potential Exit from the Map Tile). The Exploration Token also has the Heroes draw a Lost Tombs Encounter card - Shafts of Light. As listed on the card, the Heroes must choose as a group, Avoid the Light or Solve the Puzzle. They decide to Solve the Puzzle using their Skills, but unfortunately, they don't all succeed at the the tests they are required to make and failing the Encounter triggers a Trap!  

The Heroes draw a Trap card and discover the Room Filling with Sand!   

Using the *Room Filling* Trap Type, it notes that all of the Heroes not on the Map Tile are immediately moved into the Room the shortest distance to not be on a puzzle-cut doorway space. It also blocks off the Entrance as well as all other open Doorways with a Stone Slab marker that slides down into place, covering the Puzzle-Cut spaces. The Heroes are Trapped!  

Next on the Room Filling Trap Type Reference card it has the players place a Fill marker in every interior corner of the Room, including where the End Cap was placed (the Stone Slabs do not count as Walls for this). In this case the Fill markers used are Sand Fill markers, as noted on the Trap card that was drawn.  

The Heroes now draw a Trap Solution medium size card to determine what they need to do to disarm the Trap before they are buried and crushed by the cascading Sand that pours in all around them!  

They draw *Find the Pressure Plate*.  

To complete the Solution and disarm the Trap, the Heroes need to scatter around the Room and use their Luck skill to place Scavenged markers in every space of the Map Tile! But remember, the Room Filling with Sand Trap card noted that the Sand Fill markers slow down the Heroes' movement in spaces that it covers, and even more so once every space on the Map Tile has a Sand Fill marker in it. It's a race against the clock!  

The Heroes spread out and start using their Luck to place Scavenged markers as they desperately search for the Pressure Plate. But, as noted on the Room Filling Reference card, at the end of each Turn, every space on the Map Tile that is adjacent to a space with a Fill marker, also gets a Fill marker (limit 1 per space), as the Sand begins to fill the Room.  

The Heroes continue to make Luck tests and place Scavenged markers around the board, until the last space has one, and that will be the location of the Pressure Plate. But as listed on the Room Filling Trap Type Reference card, once every space of the Map Tile has a Sand Fill marker, the Heroes start taking increasing Damage every Turn as they are buried alive. It's going to be close!  

According to the Trap Solution, even once the Heroes find the Pressure Plate, they still need to use their Strength to disable it before being crushed by the sand.  

...and we leave our Heroes in a Cliffhanger! Will they find the Pressure Plate and disarm it in time? Or will they become just another relic added to this Lost Tomb, buried in the desert sands of Egypt?  

As you can see, the Traps in the Lost Tombs of Khamuntet are a really dynamic and exciting new addition to Shadows of Brimstone that is quintessential to the 1930's Pulp genre, and this is just one example of a Trap Card, Trap Type, and Trap Solution combo. There is still a lot more to explore!  

## Team Heroes
With the new Team Hero Classes introduced in Brimstone Adventure Sets, all of the Heroes of the same Hero Class (Conquistador or Viking) share the same basic set of abilities, but each player chooses which of the 4 starting Upgrades for that Hero Class to use, giving them a Sub-Class - A Conquistador  may be an Explorer, Duelist, El Capitan, or Soldier; while a Viking may be a Jarl chieftan, Raider, Berserker, or Huscarl. This defines your basic character stats - how much Health and Sanity you have, how good you are at hitting enemies with your weapons, how good you are at solving puzzles or dodging fiendish traps, etc. It also gives you a unique starting ability and defines your basic starting Gear - do you start with a War Axe, a shield and sword, Dueling Blades? Each Hero also starts with a Random Personal Item that gives them a bit more ‘character’.  

One other exciting element to the new Team Heroes is the Team Hero Abilities deck. At the start of each Adventure, the players draw one card from the Viking Team Abilities deck for each Viking Hero in the party, and adds it to a shared pool of cards. Each of these cards is a special ability that can be used once during the Adventure, and generally gives all Heroes of that type a bonus.  You must choose as a team when best to use them. In this way, the more Vikings you have on a team, the more Team Ability cards you get to draw at the start of each Adventure to help all Viking Heroes! This works the same way for the Conquistadors, and allows for thematic and heroic teamwork between all the characters in the Hero Party that are of the same Hero Class.  

One of the major new features of the Brimstone Adventures Sets is the introduction of Team Heroes. Instead of being a diverse group that has come together through circumstance to fight back the Darkness, the Team Heroes are a close-knit fighting force that share a common background and have trained to fight side-by-side in battle. Because of this, with a group of Team Heroes, all of the characters start from the same basic Class (Viking or Conquistador), but choose a specialty in the form of their Starting Upgrade card. Unlike normal Hero Classes, a Team Hero Class has 4 Starting Upgrades, each of which represents a Sub-Class specialty (Viking – Raider or Viking – Berserker for instance). The Starting Upgrade card tells you which version of the Hero Character Sheet to use, as well as giving you a cool and unique ability themed for your chosen specialty.  

Because a group of Team Heroes share the same Hero Class, they all have the same basic Abilities (all Vikings use Rage Tokens, all Conquistadors use Ambition Tokens, etc.). But, each version of the Hero Character Sheet has a different set of Skill Values, stats, portrait, and Starting Gear based on the theme of their Sub-Class specialty. All Vikings, for instance, are strong and have a good Willpower against the horrors of the night, but Berserkers are fast and wild, while Huscarls are better at range and defense. This means that there is still quite a bit of variety within the Team, even though all of the characters share some similar abilities.  

Team Heroes also share a single Upgrade Chart, with each of the four columns being themed for one of the Sub-Class specialties. When leveling up, a Team Hero character can still choose any of the Upgrade Chart abilities as any other Hero would, but you will find that one of the columns will synergize a little better with your themed specialty. This retains a lot of the diversity of individual Hero Classes, but allows you to discuss as a team which Upgrades you each want to take and how they will best suit the party as a whole, based on the gear you have found and which path the other Heroes in the group have taken.  

**Team Ability Cards**  
One of the strongest benefits of being a Team Hero is gaining the use of Team Ability Cards. This deck of cards is unique to the Team Hero Class being played (Vikings, Conquistadors, etc.) and introduces an element of themed teamwork bonuses that usually benefit all Heroes in the party of that Team Hero Class.  

At the start of each Adventure, the Heroes may draw one card from the deck for each Team Hero character in the party. These cards are added to a Card Pool shared by the Heroes. Each Team Ability card is one use for that Adventure, and the Heroes must decide as a group when to play them and how best to use the extra bonuses that they give. Because this is a deck of cards, it means that the Team Ability Cards that your party has will change from Adventure to Adventure, keeping things exciting.  

The more Vikings you have in the party, the more Viking Team Ability cards you get to draw. And those cards specifically benefit Viking Heroes. In this way, Vikings or Conquistadors can be part of any Hero party, giving themed bonuses to themselves along the way, but a full group of Vikings can really maximize their cards, as each Viking adds a card to the Pool and those cards usually boost all Vikings when played.  

**Personal Item Cards**  
Every Team Hero Class has its own deck of Personal Item cards to draw from, giving the Heroes a thematic touch specific to their background and style.  

**Rage Tokens**  
One of the special abilities of the Vikings is the use of Rage Tokens. For every 2 Wounds a Viking Hero takes, he gains 1 Rage Token (holding up to his Max Rage at any given time). Then he can unleash those Rage Tokens to add +1 Damage each to one of his Combat Hits. This allows Viking Heroes to absorb Wounds done by Enemies, and turn that into Damage to throw back at them!  

In addition, Vikings tend to have a higher than normal Health (allowing them to better use Wounds as a sort of 'currency' to gain Rage), and the built-in Battle Fury ability which, once per turn, lets a Viking Heal 2 Wounds when they kill an Enemy.  

In this way, it creates a gameplay loop of taking wounds from Enemies to gain Rage, using that Rage to cut down your foes, and then Healing the Wounds you took by defeating Enemies. A Viking's love for battle is unmatched!  

**Ambition Tokens**  
One of the main abilities that all Conquistadors share is the power to use Ambition Tokens. A Conquistador’s Ambition is beyond measure, and can be a ruthless tool when exploring the jungle or battling for survival.  

Much like Grit, a Conquistador Hero has a Max Ambition value, and starts each Adventure with 1 Ambition Token (as well as their normal Grit). Once per turn, a Conquistador may use an Ambition Token to Re-roll any single die that the Hero just rolled, but adding +2 to the result. Ambition can even be used on a roll that has already been Re-rolled! In this way, Conquistadors can push themselves to the limits to accomplish their lofty goals.  

Also, whenever a Conquistador would Recover a Grit, they may choose to Recover an Ambition Token instead. And, because they have both a Max Grit and a Max Ambition, this means that Conquistadors can hold double the normal number of ‘Re-rolls’ at a time, rarely finding themselves unable to utilize those Move rolls of 1 to gain a token.  

One of the major down sides to Conquistadors, however, is their Ruthless Conquest ability gives them a starting Corruption Resistance of only 4 (instead of the normal 5). This means that Conquistador Heroes are more easily corrupted by the power of the Void, and more prone to descend into madness and mutation!  

## Rivals Card Sets
Some of the Stretch Goals that you guys seemed most excited for during the campaign and beyond, were the Rivals card sets. These are card supplements that allow you to use your existing Hero minis as 'Rival Hero' Enemies to fight during an Adventure, facing off with powerful and characterful Heroes as foes!   

During the Kickstarter campaign, we unlocked a set of these cards and rules for the Old West Rivals, Feudal Japan Rivals, and Conquistador and Viking Rivals. This is a fun way to see your Hero models in a new light, and works especially well with the Trederran Strike Team, where all of the Heroes from Earth are potential Enemies to them.  

Each of these three Rivals cards sets comes with an Enemy Record Sheet for the Rivals group (or two in the case of the Conquistadors and Vikings), rules for how to use them in game, and all of the cards you need to get them into your adventures, including Threat cards (LOW, MED, HIGH, and EPIC), as well as Rival Specialties cards to represent the different specific Heroes that you may run into.  

The basic stats and abilities listed on the Enemy Record Sheet are the baseline for all Rivals of that type (Frontier Posse for the Old West or Samurai War Party for Feudal Japan, etc.). These Enemy Record Sheets are meant to represent general fighters of that era, and the abilities and stats they have are designed to feel like you are fighting actual Heroes, rather than just any other group of Enemies you might come across.  

Above you can see the Frontier Posse Enemy Record Sheet that represents fighting Rivals from the Old West. They have the Shootout Standard Ability, so they try to keep their distance, having a gunfight with the Heroes; as well as Wild West Pistols for their Ranged Attacks. Also note that, just like Heroes, these guys roll a D6 for Damage on each Hit they score (if the target Hero fails their Defense roll of course), whether it is from their pistols or from Combat. They also have a Gunfighting ability, allowing them to effectively get 'Critical Hits' in a sense (ignoring Defense) on their Ranged Attacks. And their Frontier Grit ability allows them to Re-roll some of their missed To Hit rolls, and prevent some incoming damage that they would potentially take, representing the use of Grit that a Hero would normally use to save their bacon in a pinch.  

You also might notice that all of the Rivals Enemy Record Sheets include a brand new Rival Specialties Standard Ability (at the top of the Abilities box). This is a special set of cards, unique to that particular Rivals Enemy Type (Frontier Posse, Samurai War Party, etc.), that allows for individual models within the group to be themed for a specific Hero Class that a player might normally play as their Hero.  

These Rival Specialties cards modify the stats and abilities of one individual model among the Rivals Enemy Group, making them a champion of the group. In the image above, you can see a couple of the Rival Specialties from the Feudal Japan set and a couple from the Old West set.  The US Marshal Rival Specialties card, for instance, turns one of the models into a US Marshal, giving him the added benefits of a Shotgun and Law Badge, as seen on the card above.  

These Rivals Specialties cards also allow for players to scale the challenge and complexity of the Rivals they run into.  

For a Common group of Rivals, you can simply ignore the Rival Specialties and fight them as they appear on the Enemy Record Sheet. This still creates a fun and thematic fight, but keeps it streamlined for faster (and slightly easier) play.  

For a Standard group of Rivals, half the models in the group (rounding up) get a Rival Specialties card drawn for them. These are the stand-out champions of the group and the rest represent henchmen or lesser experienced members of the group (it can be fun to use Ally minis to represent the Rivals that don't have a Specialties card drawn for them).  

And finally, a Heroic group of Rivals, is for players that want to dive into the deep end, where every Rival model gets a Rival Specialties card drawn for them. This adds a bit more to keep track of, but really gives the full feel of fighting a team of Enemy 'Heroes' where each model has its own style and personality. It can also be a really tough challenge of a fight!  

Any way you play them, the Rivals create a new and exciting experience in your games, with tons of tactical choices that must be made in how you approach a Fight with these deadly new Enemies.  Do you focus your attacks on the Wandering Samurai that's darting between your Heroes, slicing you to ribbons, or do you turn your attention to the Frontier Doc that's running along behind him, healing the Damage that you've dished out? Or, do you eliminate the Rancher at the back of the group that's picking you off one by one with her Rapid Shot Rifle?!?  

In addition to all of that, some of the Threat cards and Elite Abilities for the Rivals even allow them to draw a few Artifacts or Gear cards, pulled from the normal Hero card decks and used by the Enemies against you! Maybe this group of Rivals just returned from the Targa Plateau and one of them has a Trun Disintegrator he's been itching to try out! Or a Teleportation Bracelet, allowing him to teleport around the board to attack you from behind! The greater your Brimstone collection, the more wild combos and challenging Rivals you can face!  

**Further Rules and Clarifications:**  

Initiative -  An entire Enemy Group of Rivals always has a shared Initiative value, even though they may move and fight very differently from one another due to their Rival Specialties cards. None of these cards modify their Initiative, and they don't gain modifiers to their Initiative from Artifact or Gear cards they draw.  

Activation -  When the Rivals Enemy Group Activates, each of the Rivals models that are part of the group should be Activated individually, one at a time, starting with the closest model to a Hero first, as normal. Move and Attack with each model before proceeding to the next Rivals model. They all still count as a single Enemy Group for targeting the Heroes, Shootout, etc.  

Targeted Markers -  *This replaces using Shootout markers for targeting and firing.*  Whenever a Hero is targeted by a Rivals Enemy, place a Targeted marker by that Hero (any appropriate marker can be used for this) to show that the Hero has been targeted by a Rival once during the Enemy Group's Activation. When the next Rivals model selects a target, they will prioritize Heroes that do not yet have a Targeted marker by them, or has fewer markers than other potential targets. (This replaces using Shootout markers for the Shootout Standard Ability, as the way those markers work is dependent on all of the Enemies using them having the same stats and Ranged Attack).  

Rival Specialties and Shootout Standard Abilities -  A good synopsis of how many Rival Specialties cards to use when you encounter the Rivals can be found above - depending on if you want a Common, Standard, or Heroic challenge. The rules for the Shootout Standard Ability can be found on the included Reference card for Shootout. Note that Targeted markers are used here instead of normal Shootout markers. Rivals with the Shootout ability still move and fire at their target as described in the rules for Shootout.  

## Heroes

### Cursed Eternal
A full new Hero Class for the Spanish Conquistador theme, the Cursed Eternal Kickstarter Exclusive Promo Hero is not part of the Conquistador Team Heroes, but rather a stand-alone Hero Class in his own right. This means that he has his own unique Abilities, Starting Upgrades, and Skill Tree, but he does not benefit from all the synergy that being part of the Conquistador Team Heroes brings. For instance, the Cursed Eternal is still considered a Conquistador for Team Ability cards, but he does not generate any of these cards for the Hero Party, he must rely on the cards that the other Conquistadors bring to the group.  

Having drank from the Fountain of Youth, the Cursed Eternal is blessed and cursed with immortality. Taking Hits every turn (more so as the Darkness grows stronger on the Depth Track) from the withering effects of the curse, he must fight to stave off the deterioration, consuming the souls of his foes with his magical Ghost Blade to heal. Even if KO’d by Wounds, he can automatically Recover at the start of the next turn, rolling for Injury and Healing as normal, and Recovering a Grit, as he stands back up from even the most grievous of injuries! Carrying with him a small amount of the Fountain Water in a bottle, he can drink from it once per Adventure to Fully Heal and remove all Injuries, Mutations, and Status Effects that have built up on him. Of course, Madness is another story.  

### Valkyrie Shield Maiden
Similar to the Cursed Eternal, the Kickstarter Exclusive Promo Hero Valkyrie is a full new Hero Class for the Norse theme. She is not part of the Viking Team Heroes, but rather a stand-alone Hero Class in her own right. A Mythic warrior in the service of Odin, the Valkyrie is one of the strongest fighters around. As the Valkyries, by definition, are female, the Valkyrie Hero Class does not have a ‘Male’ version on the back of the Hero Character Sheet. Instead, there are two different versions of the Valkyrie herself, each with different Starting Gear and stats.  

The Valkyrie Shield Maiden is a defender of light sent by Odin to protect the world of mankind against the spread of Darkness. Heavily armored with a helm, shield, and Spear, the Shield Maiden can challenge foes, shrugging off damage with her Valhallan Armor and turning aside blows to protect herself or others with her Mythic Shield, while skewering them with her warrior’s spear.  

The Valkyrie Avenger instead embodies the sum of Odin’s wrath! Equipped with a helm and spear, she has forgone any heavy armor for speed and agility. Cutting through enemies with each stroke of her Avenging Blade, a mythic sword that can actually slice Enemies in half, potentially killing them outright!  
## Enemies

### Thunderforged Titan
The Thunderforged Titan is one of the tallest Enemies in the game, towering over the Heroes. The head of its massive Underworld Hammer alone is larger than most Heroes, allowing it to crush foes at a distance of up to 6 spaces away with its Melee Attacks, and causing Combat Hits to Heroes adjacent to the target as well. With a hefty Armor 4+ save, the titan shrugs off most damage, while crackling with Bound Lightning that electrifies adjacent Heroes when they assign Critical Hits to the titan (note that a Hero that rolls a Critical Hit may elect not to assign that Hit to avoid the Bound Lightning).  

In addition, the Thunderforged Titan wields an entire deck of deadly Titanic Devastation cards to wreak havoc on the Heroes, while causing Fiery Eruptions of molten magma to burst from the ground whenever the Hold Back the Darkness roll is failed.  

The Thunderforged Titan’s Hammer of the Underworld ability allows it to make Melee Attacks on a Hero up to six spaces away. In addition, for each successful Hit on the target, every other Hero adjacent to the target also takes one Combat Hit from the Titan. This means that the Heroes must spread out if they want to avoid getting crushed by each swing of the mighty hammer. Another devastating effect of the Underworld Hammer is that the Thunderforged Titan’s Melee To Hit rolls of 6+ are -1 Defense for the Hero. This includes the extra Combat Hit caused to other Heroes adjacent to the target for that Hit.  

One of the more deadly abilities of the Thunderforged Titan is the Fiery Eruption of magma that happens whenever the Hold Back the Darkness roll is failed during the fight. This selects D3-1 Random Heroes for an Eruption marker to be placed in their space. Then each of these Eruption markers Bounces three times to find its final position (each of these is a normal Bounce, using the D8 to determine a Random adjacent space to move to if possible). Once the markers have Bounced, any Hero that is in the same or an adjacent space to 1 or more Eruption markers takes D6 Wounds, ignoring Defense.  

There is a new Mission included in this XXL Enemy pack, allowing the Heroes to face off with one of these terrifying titans from the Underworld.  It is called "Twilight of the Gods", and the Heroes must track the Thunderforged Titan that has emerged from the Underworld, and defeat it before it wreaks havoc on the realms of gods and men!  

### Setaris Ravagers
The Setaris Kitewings were first introduced in the Conquest of Planet Earth board game as one of the many Alien Races that players could control in their bid to conquer 1950's Earth. A reptilian species, the Setaris soar through the sky with their swooping wings and lashing tails, chittering and cawing to each other through their long vicious beaks filled with razor sharp teeth. But do not let their savage and monstrous demeanor fool you; they are an advanced civilization, ruthless in their desire for conquest, wielding dangerous technologies and armed with powerful weapons.  


Though not particularly tough, the Setaris Ravagers can strike fast and hard, blasting the Heroes with their Setaris Laser Rifles before closing in to scratch and claw with their talons. These sinister Enemies use the rules for Snap Fire,  giving them the opportunity to make a free Ranged Attack each turn before closing in on the Heroes to use their Combat; then falling back to a distance to be ready to start the process again the following turn. And, with their Masters of Snap Fire ability, the Ravagers are even harder to pin down than other Enemies that use Snap Fire. They are also quite fast as they fly through the air, evading damage with their Agile Dodge.  

As Alien pirates, enclaves of Setaris Ravagers can be found across the  galaxy, looting and pillaging travelers and settlements, then disappearing as quickly as they arrived. To represent this, the Setaris  Ravagers Enemy Pack includes OtherWorld Threat Cards for encountering them in the Swamps of Jargono, Blasted Wastes, the Targa Plateau, and the Derelict Ship, as well as the standard Threat cards for Low, Med, and High threats.  

### Targa Library
One of the key features of the Targa Plateau Library is the ability for the Library, itself, to learn about your Heroes as it collects data on you. This is tracked as Archive markers that are placed near the Depth Track to show how much information the Library has gathered on you during the current Adventure. The number of Archive markers have no direct impact, but are often referenced by Encounters and Enemy abilities within the Targa Plateau. For example, the Librarian's Adaptive Strategy ability makes its To Hit rolls of 6+ gain +1 Damage for every Archive marker currently on the Depth Track.  

In addition, at the end of the Adventure, all of the Archive markers are discarded, but for every 5 Archive markers on the Depth Track, the Library makes a more permanent record about your Heroes, converting them into 1 Library Knowledge (marked down on your Campaign Log). From that point forward, the first time each Adventure that your Heroes face any Keyword Targa Enemies or enter the Targa Library, you must roll on the Library Knowledge chart (adding +1 to the roll for every Library Knowledge beyond the first), to see what bonus the Library gains against you for this Adventure. As you explore the ancient frozen city of the Targa Plateau, you learn about its hazards and secrets. But beware, it is also learning about you, with the ultimate goal of adding your distinctive traits to the Archive.  

### Shadow Lurkers
The Shadow Lurkers are terrifyingly powerful demons that are One with the Darkness, shifting through the shadows to gain a permanent Cover 5+ save against all incoming Hits (potentially canceling Hits before Damage is even rolled). More than any other Enemy, these Demons from the Void scale with the Heroes, becoming monstrously powerful as the Heroes they hunt grow in Hero Level and collect Artifacts during their travels. They prioritize their targets based on the highest Hero Level/XP total, and the Feast of Shadows ability makes their base Combat Damage multiply by the target's Hero Level. While low level Heroes may be easier prey, the higher level Heroes draw out the strongest and most ancient of these creatures, to feed on the more delicious memories and emotions of Heroes that have richer experiences. They are also Fueled by Greed, jealously watching and waiting for unwary travelers to pick up relics in worlds where they lurk, gaining extra Combat for each Artifact the target carries matching the World they are currently in.  

With a set of normal Threat cards, as well as individual Threat cards for every OtherWorld currently in the game, the Shadow Lurkers are an ever present danger to the Heroes as they explore from world to world. They are also more commonly found in the Derelict Ship (with an extra Threat card for that World), as it is veiled in darkness and death, and filled with powerful artifacts and technology to entice travelers.  

### Feathered Serpents
Fast and deadly, the Feathered Serpents have a move of 12 and Flight, allowing them to move through other models and change targets each turn.  Though not particularly tough individually, these mythic beasts attack in packs, using speed and accuracy to harass their foes. Their deadly Venom Strike can ignore the target's Defense on To Hit rolls of 6+, and potentially leave them poisoned,  while their high move, fast Initiative, and a 3+ Melee To Hit gives them a powerful alpha strike. This combined with their Kotak's Protection ability to cheat death makes the Feathered Serpents a scary encounter that can significantly weaken the Heroes as they push further into the sacred temples and jungles the serpents protect.  

The Feathered Serpents have a standard set of Threat cards, as well as OtherWorld Threat cards for the Swamps of Jargono, protecting many of the ancient and crumbling ruins there once dedicated to the cosmic deity Kotak.  

### Fenris Wolves
Perhaps one of the most dangerous Enemies in all of Brimstone Adventures are the Fenris Wolves. A vicious and tenacious pack of beasts, these massive wolves leap across the board at their targets, savagely tearing them apart with their snarling, snapping jaws. This is best represented by their Relentless Attack ability, allowing them to roll an extra Combat die for each successful Combat Hit they roll on the Attack. And this is allowed to cascade! As long as they keep rolling Hits, they keep getting bonus Combat for that Attack. This means that even the most stalwart of Heroes has the potential to get ripped apart if the Fenris Wolves get on a brutal streak of successful Hits. On average they will get around 3-4 Hits during their Attack, but there have been outrageous occasions during testing where a Fenris Wolf gets on a roll, dealing out a staggering 14 or 15 Hits! The Fenris Wolves are terrifying for their size and brutality, but also their unpredictable and deadly nature.   

Another exciting aspect of the Fenris Wolves Enemy Pack is that it includes the cards for three alternate OtherWorld variants of these terrifying creatures. Shadow Wolves appear in both the Forest of the Dead and the Targa Plateau, while Fire Wolves stalk the infernal, lava-filled tunnels in the Caverns of Cynder!  

### Draugar
Draugar can be challenging foes to face. Unlike most forms of Zombie in Shadows of Brimstone, the Draugar do not have a built in method of re-spawning into the fight. Instead, they are more dangerous, fearsome warriors to begin with. Equipped with Shields of the Dead, they always count as having a Cover 4+ save. This allows them to shrug off many of the critical blows that would crush another Enemy, turning it aside with ease.  The fact that it is a Cover save also means that it prevents entire Hits at a time (rather than individual Damage that Armor would stop), and there are far fewer items and abilities that let a Hero ignore Cover than Defense or Armor. In addition to a high Defense of 4, the Draugar can be difficult to take down.  

When it comes to attack, the Draugar not only have solid Combat and Damage values, but they can weaken the Heroes just by being in close proximity. Their Essence Leach ability prevents adjacent Heroes from gaining Ability Tokens or Grit. This can have devastating repercussions, as Viking Heroes depend on their Rage to overcome Enemies, and without access to Grit, Heroes are far more susceptible to being overwhelmed. This combined with their ability to Feed on Darkness, boosting the damage on Draugar To Hit rolls of 6+ based on the amount of Corruption and Mutations the Hero has, can be fatal if you have strayed too far down a dark path in your journeys.  

### Creeping Shadows
One of the new Enemy types included in The Valley of the Serpent Kings  Adventure Set is the animated darkness, itself, in the form of Creeping Shadows! You may not remember these Enemies from the KS campaign, because they were developed after the campaign came to a close. This was possible due to the fact that they are designed to use counters rather than models, allowing them to freely flow across the board, moving through other models and ending in the same space as the Heroes, enveloping them in darkness to attack.  

Stalking the dank halls of the Spanish Fort, these ethereal wraiths whisper from the darkness to sow seeds of corruption and terror into anyone foolish enough to explore the dripping passages and dungeon chambers of the castle. These Enemies can be encountered by Threat cards, Encounter cards, and even the occasional Darkness card. As noted above, Creeping Shadows move through other models and try to get into the same space as their target. When they attack, they also lash out at every Hero in the same and adjacent spaces to it. This can make a Creeping Shadow Ambush especially deadly if the Heroes are too close together as they explore. In addition, every Creeping Shadow To Hit roll of 6+ does a normal Hit, but also triggers Voices in the Dark for the Hero (that's D6 Horror Hits - as though you had strayed too far from the Lantern's light).  

Another unique aspect of the Creeping Shadows is their Living Darkness ability, giving them a Defense Value equal to the number of spaces the Enemy is from the Light Source (ie. - the Hero with the Lantern). This encourages the Heroes to rally around the Lantern's light to lower the Enemy's Defense; just don't get too close together or the Shadows will get a lot of extra Attacks as they each strike out at all adjacent Heroes.  

If these sound like a fun and dynamic Enemy to battle, encouraging tactical play... they are! And as part of this update, we wanted to give everyone the chance to start facing off against Creeping Shadows as an early Print and Play preview! This is easier to do because there are no models for these Enemies, so no proxy models are needed, just print out the cards, counters, and Enemy Record Sheet linked to below, and you can add these fun new Enemies to any game of Shadows of Brimstone.  

### Dread Inquisitors
The Dread Inquisitors are a fearsome group of Enemies. With Vicious Weapons that ignore Armor and have a Damage value equal to their To Hit roll, they can make quick work of even heavily-armored Heroes. Fueled By Dread, they can become formidable foes as they adjust their tactics based on how much Growing Dread the Heroes have collected up, and how much Dread the Heroes have already endured. This can give them a very different feel in battle, depending on how far into the Adventure they reveal themselves, or what type of Mission is being played.  

But, perhaps the most dangerous aspect of the Dread Inquisitors is their manipulation of plagues and disease! These Crimson Hand Enemies use Bring Out Your Dead to place Rotten Corpse Tokens, spreading sickness and death, and unleashing Vile Plagues of terrifying pestilence on the Heroes. The Vile Plagues deck was first introduced in the Onmorake Deluxe Enemy Pack for Forbidden Fortress, but gets a burst of deathly new cards with the Dread Inquisitors!  

### Feljeagor Slayers
Feljeagors are perhaps one of the deadliest enemies in the game,  dispatched to bring ruin on the world of men. Brutish suits of animated Thunderforged armor, they cannot be reasoned with or stopped. They continue to fight until they are literally smashed apart; and that is no easy feat. With a hefty Armor 4+ and Defense of 4, these constructs are terrifyingly durable. Their Slayer Axes have the potential to cut even the toughest of Heroes down to size. But one of  the main features of the Feljeagor Slayers is the bellowing roar of their Fel Horns, buffing themselves and all other Enemies around with Rage tokens that can give them extra Combat or allow them to shrug off damage. When the Thunderforged warriors march  to war, there can be no doubt that Ragnarok is upon us!  

### Drowned Dead
As Drowned Dead are a common Enemy to encounter while exploring a Spanish Fort, the Valley of the Serpent Kings Adventures Set includes a set of Drowned Dead Trait Cards that are drawn from when a group of these shambling dead attack the Heroes, adding extra variety and challenge to your adventures.  

A Trait Card is drawn for a group of Drowned Dead when they enter play to determine what variety of these undead explorers are taking part in the Fight. Each Trait Card tells what style of Drowned Dead they are (The Tower Guard, Watery Graves, etc.), includes additional stat modifiers and extra abilities they have, as well as any extra XP they are worth for the Heroes. This means you can face off against Drowned Dead again and again over the course of your adventures, and they always feel fresh and different…and scary!  

### Trolls
As Trolls are a common Enemy to encounter in the Norse Lands, the Gates of Valhalla Adventures Set includes a deck of 5 Troll Trait Cards that are drawn from when a group of Trolls attack the Heroes, adding extra variety and challenge to your adventures.  

A Trait Card is drawn for a group of Trolls when they enter play, modifying the type of Trolls that are taking part in the Fight. Each Trait Card tells what type of Trolls they are (Mountain Trolls, Bridge Trolls, etc.), includes additional stat modifiers and extra abilities the Trolls have, as well as any extra XP these Trolls are worth for the Heroes. This means you can face off against Trolls again and again over the course of your adventures, and they always feel fresh and different… and deadly! You may learn to fear the Cold Spite of Ice Trolls or the Deadly Aim of Mountain Trolls.  

### Gremians
In game, these Small Demon Enemies swarm the Heroes, each doing an automatic Hit to every adjacent Hero, with Damage equal to the total number of Gremians adjacent to that Hero! One Gremian attacking is not much of a threat, but 4 or 5...or 12 can be a terrifying prospect! In addition, they are very sneaky and difficult to crush, but fragile if you can get your hands on them. With a Defense of 6, but only a single Health, it usually takes a Critical Hit or a Viking's Rage to defeat them!  